LXD 6.6 release notes (#16988)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/release-notes/release-notes-6.6.md

### Consistent instance and custom volume snapshots

Consistent snapshots of both an instance and its attached volumes can now be taken together.

The `lxc snapshot` command has been extended with the `--disk-volumes` flag that accepts either `root` or `all-exclusive` values.
When `root` is specified (the default behaviour) a snapshot of just the instance's root volume is taken.
In `all-exclusive` mode the instance will be paused while a snapshot of its root volume and all exclusively attached volumes is taken.

An instance snapshot and its custom volume snapshots can be restored together using `lxc restore --disk-volumes=all-exclusive`.

- Documentation: {ref}`instances-snapshots`
- API extension: {ref}`extension-instance-snapshots-multi-volume`

### HPE Alletra storage driver

Initial support for using HPE Alletra storage appliances using iSCSI or NVME over TCP has been added.
Currently instance and custom volume recovery is not supported (but it is planned).

- Documentation: {ref}`storage-alletra`
- API extension: {ref}`extension-storage-driver-alletra`

### Persistent VM PCIe bus allocation

> Devices added to VMs now have their PCIe bus number persisted into volatile configuration keys so that the device maintains the same location on the bus when the instance is restarted. Previously when a device was hot plugged into a running VM it was possible for the operation to fail due to bus location conflicts or to succeed and then have its bus location change on subsequent restart of the instance.

Reviewer: Should we list the volatile configuration keys here?

Author: no need, its covered by the api extension docs

The duration of OIDC sessions defaults to one week and can be configured via the {config:option}`server-oidc:oidc.session.expiry` configuration key.

Verification of an OIDC session depends on a new, cluster-wide core secret.
Also introduces a new {config:option}`server-core:core.auth_secret_expiry` configuration option which can be set to define how long a given secret can be used for before it expires. This sets the upper bound of an OIDC session duration.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-auth-oidc-sessions`

### Create custom filesystem volume from tarball contents

The `lxc storage volume import` command has gained support for creating a custom filesystem volume from the contents of a tarball.

A new supported value of `tar` has been added to the `--type` flag that will cause the contents of the tarball to be unpacked into the newly created volume.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-import-custom-volume-tar`

### Forced project deletion

It is now possible to forcefully delete a project and all of its entities using the `lxc project delete <project> --force` command.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-projects-force-delete`

> 

Author: done

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Release notes for LXD 6.6, including highlights about new features, bugfixes, and other updates from the LXD project.
---

(ref-release-notes-6.6)=
# LXD 6.6 release notes

> % Any appropriate introductory remarks, such as the type of release or when support ends for this release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a {ref}`feature release <ref-releases-feature>` and is not recommended for production use. 
```

Author: ah good spot, thanks!

```{admonition} Release notes content
:class: note
These release notes cover updates in the [core LXD repository](https://github.com/canonical/lxd) and the [LXD snap package](https://snapcraft.io/lxd). For related updates outside of these repositories, such as in the [LXD UI](https://github.com/canonical/lxd-ui), please see the release announcement in [our Discourse forum](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/tags/c/lxd/126/release).
```

(ref-release-notes-6.6-highlights)=
## Highlights

This section highlights new and improved features in this release.

### Placement groups

> A new concept has been added to LXD called Placement groups.

Author: Fixed

Placement groups provide declarative control over how instances are distributed across cluster members.

> They define both a policy (how instances should be distributed) and a rigor (how strictly the policy is enforced).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They define both a **policy** (how instances should be distributed) and a **rigor** (how strictly the policy is enforced).
```

Placement groups are project-scoped resources, which means different projects can have placement groups with the same name without conflict.

- Documentation: {ref}`exp-clusters-placement`
- API extension: {ref}`extension-instance-placement-groups`

### Placement cluster member group recorded

When an instance is placed into a cluster member group using the `--target=@<group>` syntax the group specified is now recorded into a new {config:option}`instance-volatile:volatile.cluster.group` configuration key.

> This is then used during cluster member evacuation when re-placing instances to ensure the instance remains within the specified group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is then used during cluster member evacuation when {ref}`restoring instances <cluster-restore>` to ensure the instance remains within the specified group.
```

### Kubernetes Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver and `/dev/lxd` volume management

> The LXD project now provides a CSI driver that allows Kubernetes to provision and manage volumes for K8s Pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LXD now provides a CSI driver that allows Kubernetes to provision and manage volumes for K8s Pods.
```

The driver is an open source implementation of the Container Storage Interface (CSI) that integrates LXD storage backends with Kubernetes.
It leverages LXD's wide range of supported storage drivers, enabling dynamic provisioning of both local and remote volumes.
Depending on the storage pool, the CSI supports provisioning of both block and filesystem volumes.

> To enable this functionality the `/dev/lxd` guest API has been extended to support fine-grained authorization (by way of bearer token authentication) and volume management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable this functionality, the `/dev/lxd` guest API has been extended to support fine-grained authorization (by way of bearer token authentication) and volume management.
```

- Documentation: {ref}`exp-csi`
- Documentation: {ref}`devlxd-authenticate`
- API extension: {ref}`extension-auth-bearer-devlxd`
- API extension: {ref}`extension-devlxd-volume-management`

### Custom storage volume recovery improvements

> Using the {ref}`extension-backup-metadataversion` improvements added to LXD 6.5 the {ref}`lxd recover <disaster-recovery>` tool has been improved to allow more extensive recovery of custom volumes attached to instances. The full custom volume configuration can now be recovered. Additionally it now supports recovery from {ref}`storage-powerflex` and {ref}`storage-pure` pools which was previously not supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the {ref}`extension-backup-metadataversion` improvements added in LXD 6.5, the {ref}`lxd recover <disaster-recovery>` tool now allows more extensive recovery of custom volumes attached to instances. The full custom volume configuration can now be recovered. Additionally, the tool now supports recovery from {ref}`storage-powerflex` and {ref}`storage-pure` pools.
```

Author: fixed

This change was also required to make the K8s CSI driver usable because it dynamically adds and removes custom filesystem volumes from running VMs.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-vm-persistent-bus`

### Per-project image and backup volumes

It has long been possible to specify that downloaded images and exported backups be stored in a custom volume on a particular storage pool.
It is now possible to specify these volumes on a per-project basis, allowing for images and backups to be stored in different custom volumes (and storage pools) for different projects.

Two new configuration keys have been introduced; {config:option}`server-miscellaneous:storage.project.{name}.images_volume` and
{config:option}`server-miscellaneous:storage.project.{name}.backups_volume` per each project to allow for a storage volume on an existing
pool be used for storing the project-specific images and backups artifacts.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-daemon-storage-per-project`

### OVN internal network forward and load balancers

> Added support for internal OVN load balancers and network forwards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Support has been added for internal OVN load balancers and network forwards.
```

This approach allows `ovn` networks to define ports on internal IP addresses that can be forwarded to other internal IPs inside their respective networks.
This change removes the previous limitation on `ovn` networks that load balancers and network forwards could only use external IP addresses to forward to internal IPs.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-ovn-internal-load-balancer`

### OVN DHCP ranges

> Added support for the {config:option}`network-ovn-network-conf:ipv4.dhcp.ranges` configuration key for `ovn` networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LXD has added the {config:option}`network-ovn-network-conf:ipv4.dhcp.ranges` configuration key for `ovn` networks.
```

Author: Went with:

> This release adds a new configuration key {config:option}`network-ovn-network-conf:ipv4.dhcp.ranges` for `ovn` networks.

Because its consistent with the other "This release" rather than mixing between "LXD has added" and "This release". 

Have also tried to avoid saying "LXD" as much as possible (its the LXD release notes so its implicit) and avoid making it sound like an identity in its own right.

This key allows specifying a list of IPv4 ranges reserved for dynamic allocation using DHCP.
This is useful when setting up a Network forward towards a floating IP inside an `ovn` network that needs to be prevented from being allocated via DHCP.

- API extension: {ref}`extension-ovn-dhcp-ranges`

### OVN NIC acceleration parent interface option

Added support for specifying the OVN NIC acceleration physical function interfaces to allocate virtual functions from.

> This avoids the need for adding the physical function interfaces to the OVN integration bridge (which in turn prevented them from being used for host connectivity).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This avoids the need to add the physical function interfaces to the OVN integration bridge, which had prevented their use for host connectivity.
```

This change introduces a new configuration key for `ovn` networks and NICs:

> - {config:option}`device-nic-ovn-device-conf:acceleration.parent` - Comma separated list of physical function (PF) interfaces to allocate virtual functions (VFs) from for hardware acceleration when {config:option}`device-nic-ovn-device-conf:acceleration` is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- {config:option}`device-nic-ovn-device-conf:acceleration.parent` - Comma-separated list of physical function (PF) interfaces from which to allocate virtual functions (VFs) for hardware acceleration, when {config:option}`device-nic-ovn-device-conf:acceleration` is enabled.
```

- API extension: {ref}`extension-ovn-nic-acceleration-parent`

### Improved OIDC authentication provider compatibility using sessions

> Added session support for OIDC authentication. This enables compatibility with identity providers that issue opaque access tokens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release adds session support for OIDC authentication. This enables compatibility with identity providers that issue opaque access tokens.
```

Author: Fixed, but feels somewhat verbose and repetitive.

Reviewer 2: I don't mind variations. Mainly, I wanted to avoid inconsistent use of sentence fragments vs complete sentences.

When a session expires, LXD will re-verify the login with the identity provider.
The duration of OIDC sessions defaults to one week and can be configured via the {config:option}`server-oidc:oidc.session.expiry` configuration key.

Verification of an OIDC session depends on a new, cluster-wide core secret.

> Also introduces a new {config:option}`server-core:core.auth_secret_expiry` configuration option which can be set to define how long a given secret can be used for before it expires. This sets the upper bound of an OIDC session duration.

Author: I'll keep the "This sets the upper bound of an OIDC session duration" part as its important and don't want to require the reader to make the link between the two themselves.

- [{spellexception}`The fanotify mechanism does not notice dynamic removal of underlying devices`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/issues/15894)
- [{spellexception}`Removing a member from cluster group that is not in any other group silently ignores request`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/issues/16074)
- [{spellexception}`Prune cached images during project delete`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/pull/16623)

(ref-release-notes-6.6-incompatible)=
## Backwards-incompatible changes

These changes are not compatible with older versions of LXD or its clients.

### Asynchronous storage volume and profile API endpoints

Certain storage and profile endpoints that were previously synchronous now return an operation and behave asynchronously.

The latest LXD Go client detects the presence of this API extension. When it is available, the caller receives an operation object directly from the LXD server.
If the extension is not present on the server, then the server response is wrapped in a completed operation, allowing the caller to handle it as an operation while lacking a retrievable operation ID.

Older LXD Go clients are incompatible with servers that include this extension.

> Instead of returning the expected successful response, they will receive an operation response.

Author: fixed

Endpoints converted to asynchronous behavior:

- `POST /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}` - Create storage volume
- `PUT /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}` - Update storage volume
- `PATCH /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}` - Patch storage volume
- `POST /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}` - Rename storage volume
- `DELETE /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}` - Delete storage volume
- `PUT /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}/snapshots/{snap}` - Update storage volume snapshot
- `PATCH /storage-pools/{pool}/volumes/{type}/{vol}/snapshots/{snap}` - Patch storage volume snapshot
- `PUT /1.0/profiles/{name}` - Update profile
- `PATCH /1.0/profiles/{name}` - Patch profile

- API extension: {ref}`extension-storage-and-profile-operations`

(ref-release-notes-6.6-deprecated)=
## Deprecated features

These features are removed in this release.

### Instance placement scriptlet removed

> The instance placement scriptlet functionality (and the associated `instances_placement_scriptlet` API extension) has been removed in preference to the new {ref}`exp-clusters-placement` functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The instance placement scriptlet functionality (and the associated `instances_placement_scriptlet` API extension) has been removed in favor of the new {ref}`exp-clusters-placement` functionality.
```

> If a scriptlet is set in the removed `instances.placement.scriptlet` configuration option it will be stored in the `user.instances.placement.script` configuration option when upgrading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a scriptlet is set in the removed `instances.placement.scriptlet` configuration option, it is stored in the `user.instances.placement.script` configuration option when upgrading.
```
